#LyX 1.6.10 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 345
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry true
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\paperorientation portrait
\leftmargin 2cm
\topmargin 2cm
\rightmargin 2cm
\bottommargin 2cm
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\author "" 
\author "" 
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
SF2 Interim Report
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Devang Agrawal
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
May 2015
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Image Processing is a very exciting field in the domain of Signal Processing.
 In this lab various characteristics of filtered images are explored and
 are then used to design effective compression techniques for the images.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Images
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Raw images are simple 2d matrices of numbers.
 Colormaps are used to map these numbers to what colour is displayed on
 the screen.
 Colormaps can be of various different types, example linear or designed
 for histogram equalization.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Image Filtering
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The simple 
\emph on
low-pass filter
\emph default
 used in the lab has a half cosine impulse response in 1 dimension.
 
\emph on
Separable 
\emph default
2-D filtering can be used to get a 2D low-pass filter by separately filtering
 the rows and columns.
 In the lab the output from filtering rows first or filtering columns first
 was observed and it was concluded that the output in the 2 cases was the
 same.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
High-pass filtered 
\emph default
image
\emph on
 
\emph default
can be created by substracting the low-pass filtered image from the original
 one.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Comparison at different filter lengths
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As the filter length is increaced the cut-off point of low-pass filter increaces
 and that of the high-pass filter decreaces.
 Hence the low-pass filtered image becomes blurry as filter length increaces.
 The high-pass filtered image accounts for more and more of the relevant
 features as the filter length increaces.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Energy Content
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The energy content of the high-pass filtered image was found to be much
 lesser than that of low-pass filtered images.
 Following observations in Section 3.1 the energy content of the high pass
 filtered images increaced with increacing filter length, however they still
 never get close to that of low-pass filtered images.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Laplacian Pyramid
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The Laplacian pyramid is a energy compaction scheme based on the observation
 made in Section 3.22.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Lowpass images have much lower bandwidth than the original image and can
 hence be sub-sampled without loss of much information.
 This forms the basis of the Laplacian Pyramid scheme.
 Matlab scripts were written to encode images as Laplacian pyramids and
 to reconstruct them from these pyramids.
 It was observed that without quantization there was no error between the
 original image and the reconstructed images.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Quantization and coding efficiency
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For effective data compression the bits needed to store the decimated low-pass
 image and the errors at each stage of the pyramid need to be lower than
 that required for the original image.
 This was done by finding the total entropy of each image and equating it
 to the number of bits needed to store the image, assuming that an efficient
 coding technique is used.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The number of bits required to store the original image was found to be
 more than that required for storing the error and the subsampled image.
 Hence using Laplacian pyramids can achieve data compression.
 From a information theory perspective the compression is achieved since
 the low pass image has highly corelated adjacent matrix locations, this
 structure of the low pass image is intrinsically exploited when they are
 subsampled reducing the number of bits required for storing them.
 A markov chain based technique for finding image corelations might exploit
 this structure well, achieving high compression ratios but this wasnt explored
 within the scope of the project.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The images were then quantized to a step size of 17 to further reduce their
 entropy and the number of bits required to store them.
 This reduced the storage required for the one stage laplacian pyramid scheme
 and the original image.
 The effect on the Laplacian pyramid scheme was however much stronger.
 As the number of layers of the pyramid are increaced the number of bits
 required for storing the image in the Laplacian pyramid scheme further
 decreaces.
 This is because each lowpassed image(Xn) can be treated as a new image
 which is then compressed by using an extra stage of the pyramid.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To assess the quality of the quantized image the standard deviation between
 the quantized image and the original image is used as a measure.<<comment
 on visual differences in images>>
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The r.m.s error at the same amount of quantization is much higher for the
 image reconstructed from the Laplacian pyramid scheme than that of the
 directly quantized image.
 This is because small changes due to quantization in the smaller images
 of the Laplacian pyramid have a much higher effect on the r.m.s error than
 the larger images.
 To get the same r.m.s error as a direct quantizer of step size 17, a step
 size of 10.45 is needed to quantize the images in the Laplacian pyramid.
 This gives a Compression ratio = 
\series bold
\emph on
1.58
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\series bold
Equal MSE criterion: 
\series default
To solve this problem and optimally quantize the Laplacian pyramid an equal
 MSE(mean squared error) criterion can be used.
 In this the images at various stages of the Laplacian pyramid are quantized
 so that they contribute approximately equally to the total MSE.
 This is achieved by measuring the 
\emph on

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

impulse response
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\emph default
 of different stages in the reconstructed images.
 As expected the impulse responses of the smaller images in the Laplacian
 pyramid are higher than the larger ones.
 Hence smaller step sizes are used to quantize the smaller images.
 This improves the Compression ratio to around 
\series bold
1.98 
\series default
which is much better than than the original scheme.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Effect of filter length
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In sections 4 and 5 above 
\series bold
h
\series default
 is 
\begin_inset Formula $\frac{1}{4}\left[1\:2\:1\right]$
\end_inset

, in this section 
\series bold
h
\series default
 is changed to 
\begin_inset Formula $\frac{1}{16}\left[1\:4\:6\:4\:1\right]$
\end_inset

, which has a lower cut-off frequency than the original filter.
 This altered the impulse respose of different images, which grew slower
 than sections 4 and 5 due to the low cutoff nature of the filter.
 Using optimized step sizes a Compression ratio 
\series bold
1.77 
\series default
was obtained which is less than that obtained in section 5.
 This can be explained by the lower cut-off frequency of the filter which
 causes the 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Conclusion
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
